.TH 6BED4CLIENT 8 "Februari 1, 2011"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
6bed4client \- client-side daemon for instant-on IPv6 service
.SH SYNOPSYS
.B 6bed4client
[\fB\-t\fR \fI/dev/tunX\fR] [\fB\-d\fR] [\fB\-f\fR] [\fB\-l\fR \fIv4addr\fR] [\fB\-p\fR \fIport\fR]
.PP
.B 6bed4client
[\fB\-h\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The \fB6bed4client\fR creates an instant-on, zero-config IPv6
communication facility.  It is designed to work behind NAT and
firewalls, and to find the shortest possible route to a communications
peer.
.PP
The command usually works through a 6bed4 interface, often a tunnel,
through which commands are passed to this daemon, which encapsulates
the traffic into UDP and IPv4 before sending it.  Return UDP/IPv4
traffic is decapsulated and offered through the 6bed4 interface.
.SH OPTIMAL ROUTING
The \fB6bed4client\fR goes through lengths to achieve optimal routing
for all packets.  The existence of a public server ensures that
IPv6 connections are always possible, but anything more direct is
of course better.
.PP
Note that the structure of a 6bed4 IPv6 address is such that it
reveals a host's public IPv4 address and an external UDP port used
for the 6bed4 tunneling protocol.  This information can be used to
derive both local addressing information, as well as remote.  This
will only work for addresses that start with the standard prefix
under which 6bed4 addresses are created.
.PP
If traffic is intended for the same public IPv4 address as the local
node, then it is likely to be a host on the same local network.  In
such cases, a Neighbor Solicitation is sent to the IPv4 all-hosts multicast
address in an attempt to find a direct route on the LAN.  This may not
always work, for instance in the presence of subnets without multicast
forwarding between their segments.
.PP
More generally though, a remote peer has an IPv4 address and a UDP
port over which it once commenced 6bed4 towards the public server,
to obtain its IPv6 address.  In an attempt to find a direct route,
the \fB6bed4client\fR will try to find a direct route to that
endpoint.  If it succeeds to send a Neighbor Solicitation and
receives back a Neighbor Advertisement, it has established a direct
channel for IPv6 communications, and it can continue to use that
instead of going through the public server.
.PP
Direct connections to an IPv4/UDP address will only fail if the
remote system is behind symmetric NAT or a similar firewall.  In
this case, an initiative from that remote system to contact the
local system may still succeed, and give rise to a seconde attempt
towards the remote peer, which should then succeed.  Only if both
local and remote peers use symmetric NAT, will it be necessary
to continue to communicate through the public 6bed4 server.
.PP
In general, local network traffic is preferred over anything
else.  Second-best is direct traffic to a public IPv4/UDP address,
and the public 6bed4 server would be the last resort.
.SH SPECIAL CASES
A system with access to native IPv6 can still use 6bed4, although
it would not want to setup a default route over it.  The use of
doing this is twofold: At first it unloads the public server from
having to make the connection, and secondly it makes the connection
between the local and remote host as direct as is possible over
IPv4.  The mixed setup of native IPv6 and 6bed4 will not lead to
any trouble, as 6bed4 traffic is easily recognised by the target
address prefix, and the interface is setup to handle this.
.PP
It is possible to allocate a fixed 6bed4 address for a server, and
publish it in DNS.  This would be as constant as the IPv4 address
and UDP port assigned to the \fB6bed4client\fR, but most NAT and
firewalls support port forwarding; the \fB\-p\fR option on the client
can be used to support reception of incoming 6bed4 traffic on the
forwarded port.
.PP

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-t\fR \fI/dev/tunX\fR
.TP
\fB\-\-tundev\fR \fI/dev/tunX\fR
Instead of creating a tunnel for the duration that \fB6bed4server\fR runs,
use one that already exists and that has already been setup with
the proper IPv6 prefix.  This option makes it possible for
non-root users to run \fB6bed4server\fR.  All that is required is acccess to
the tunnel device by the user that runs \fB6bed4server\fR.  Optional on Linux.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR
.TP
\fB\-\-default\-route\fR
Create a default route through the 6bed4 interface.  This means that the
entire IPv6 Internet can be accessed through the 6bed4 interface.  This is
not setup by default, as 6bed4 might also be used as an add-on interface
that connects more directly to other 6bed4 hosts.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR \fIv4addr\fR
.TP
\fB\-\-listen\fR \fIv4addr\fR
Listen for 6bed4 messages on the specified IPv4 address.  This will also
be the address from which the traffic is sent.  This setting may be
used together with \fB\-p\fR to control the daemon's behaviour such that
it can be the target of a port forwarding setup in NAT or firewall.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR \fIport\fR
.TP
\fB\-\-port\fR \fIport\fR
Let the 6bed4 daemon listen to the given UDP port.  This will also be
the port from which the traffic is sent.  This setting may be used
together with \fB\-l\fR to control the daemon's behaviour such that it
can be the target of a port forwarding setup in NAT or firewall.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR
.TP
\fB\-\-foreground\fR
.TP
\fB\-\-fork\-no\fR
Do not fork to the background.  Instead, stay on the foreground and listen
to break signals.  This is primarily useful for testing, including while
rolling out 6bed4 on a site.
.SH AUTHOR
\fB6bed4client\fR was written by Rick van Rein from OpenFortress.
It was created to support the 0cpm project.
